Mu documentation changed - New section "Generate sources from IDL" (#621)
higherkindness/mu: docs/src/main/tut/generate-sources-from-idl.md

---
layout: docs
title: Generating sources from IDL
permalink: /generate-sources-from-idl
---

# Generate sources from IDL

Since `Protobuf` and `Avro` are both a language-neutral, platform-neutral way of serializing structured data, our aim with [mu] is to create Scala definitions from these IDL files. 
Before going into implementation details let's see how to create the Scala files with our definitions.

Currently, `Avro` is supported in both `.avpr` (JSON) and `.avdl` (Avro IDL) formats, along with `Protobuf`.
The plugin's implementation basically wraps the [avrohugger] library for `Avro` 
and uses [skeuomorph] for `Protobuf` adding some mu-specific extensions.
## Plugin Installation

Add the following line to _project/plugins.sbt_:

[comment]: # (Start Replace)

```scala
addSbtPlugin("io.higherkindness" % "sbt-mu-idlgen" % "0.18.3")
```

[comment]: # (End Replace)

Note that the plugin is only available for Scala 2.12.

### Plugin Settings

> For generating Scala definitions we use `srcGen`. The easiest way to use the plugin is integrating the source generation in your compile process by adding this import to your `build.sbt` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For generating `Scala` definitions we use `srcGen`. The easiest way to use the plugin is by integrating the source generation in your compile process adding this import to your `build.sbt` file:
```

```scala
import higherkindness.mu.rpc.idlgen.IdlGenPlugin.autoImport._
``` 
and the setting,   
                                                                                
```scala  

> idlType := proto  

Reviewer: Maybe we are missing here `srcGenSerializationType := "Protobuf"`?

Author: Without the srcGenSerializationType setting it works. So the example below has the srcGenSerializationType setting but not this one.

sourceGenerators in Compile += (srcGen in Compile).taskValue
```

Otherwise, you can run the following sbt task (with the settings above in your `build.sbt`):
```sbtshell
sbt

> project foo

Reviewer 2: I'd omit the `foo` project

Author: I think it’s easier to understand for first-time-users that use multi-module project. Maybe it's better to keep unimodule project way, I'm not sure.

srcGen   
```
Note that ``project foo`` it's only for multi-module projects.

> There are a couple key settings that can be configured according to various needs. In that case you must add it as the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a couple of key settings that can be configured according to various needs. In that case, you can add them like in the following example:
```

```scala
idlType := "proto",
srcGenTargetDir := (Compile / sourceManaged).value / "mu_proto",
srcGenSerializationType := "Protobuf",
sourceGenerators in Compile += (srcGen in Compile).taskValue
```

> In the example above we are using `proto` files with `Protobuf` serialization. Also, we are putting them in ``target/scala-2.12/src_managed/main/mu_proto``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example above we are using `proto` files with `Protobuf` serialization. The plugin generates them in ``target/scala-2.12/src_managed/main/mu_proto``.
```

> Some setting options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basic settings:
```

* **`idlType`**: the type of IDL to be generated, either `proto` or `avro`.
* **`srcGenSerializationType`**: the serialization type when generating Scala sources from the IDL definitions. `Protobuf`, `Avro` or `AvroWithSchema`(see [Schema evolution/Avro](schema-evolution/avro)) are the current supported serialization types. By default, the serialization type is 'Avro'.
* **`srcGenSourceDirs`**: the list of directories where your IDL files are placed. By default: `Compile / resourceDirectory`, typically `src/main/resources/`.
* **`srcGenIDLTargetDir`**: the target directory where all the IDL files specified in `srcGenSourceDirs` will be copied. Given this configuration, the plugin will automatically copy the following to this target directory:
  * All the definitions extracted from the different `jar` or `sbt` modules, and also,
  * All the source folders specified in the `srcGenSourceDirs` setting.
* **`srcGenTargetDir`**: the Scala target directory, where the `srcGen` task will write the generated files in subpackages based on the namespaces declared in the IDL files. By default, `Compile / sourceManaged`, tipically  `target/scala-2.12/src_managed/main/`.

> The source directory must exist. Target directories will be created upon generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: The source directory must exist. Target directories will be created upon generation.
```

> There are more options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extra settings:
```

* **`genOptions`**: additional options to add to the generated `@service` annotations, after the IDL type. Currently only supports `"Gzip"`.
* **`srcGenJarNames`**: the list of jar names or sbt modules containing the IDL definitions that will be used at compilation time by `srcGen` to generate the Scala sources. By default, this sequence is empty.

> * **`idlGenBigDecimal`**: specifies how the `decimal` types will be generated. `ScalaBigDecimalGen` produces `scala.math.BigDecimal` and `ScalaBigDecimalTaggedGen` produces `scala.math.BigDecimal` but tagged with the 'precision' and 'scale'. i.e. `scala.math.BigDecimal @@ (Nat._8, Nat._2)`. By default `ScalaBigDecimalTaggedGen`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`idlGenBigDecimal`**: specifies how the `scala.math.BigDecimal` types will be generated. `ScalaBigDecimalGen` produce the regular one and `ScalaBigDecimalTaggedGen` produces `scala.math.BigDecimal` but tagged with the 'precision' and 'scale'. i.e. `scala.math.BigDecimal @@ (Nat._8, Nat._2)`. By default is `ScalaBigDecimalTaggedGen`.
```

Reviewer: Also I would add here a reference to the `http://higherkindness.io/mu/decimal-migration-guide`

Reviewer 2: I'd keep the _specifies how the `decimal`_, since it's making reference to the decimal definition in the protocol

Reviewer: Updated

  * `List(BigDecimalTaggedAvroMarshallers, JavaTimeDateAvroMarshallers)` if `srcGenSerializationType` is `Avro` or `AvroWithSchema` and `idlGenBigDecimal` is `ScalaBigDecimalTaggedGen`
  * `List(BigDecimalProtobufMarshallers, JavaTimeDateProtobufMarshallers)` if `srcGenSerializationType` is `Protobuf`.

The `JodaDateTimeAvroMarshallers` and `JodaDateTimeProtobufMarshallers` are also available, but they need the dependency `mu-rpc-marshallers-jodatime`. You can also specify custom imports with the following:
  * `idlGenMarshallerImports := List(higherkindness.mu.rpc.idlgen.Model.CustomMarshallersImport("com.sample.marshallers._"))`
  * See the [Custom codecs section in core concepts](core-concepts#custom-codecs) for more information.

You can even use `IDL` definitions packaged into artifacts within your classpath. 
In that particular situation, you need to setup `srcGenJarNames`, 
specifying the artifact names (or sbt module names) that will be unzipped/used to extract the `IDL` files.

`srcGenJarNames ` can be very useful when you want to distribute your `IDL` files 
without binary code (to prevent binary conflicts in clients).

> *Note*: regarding `srcGenSourceDirs`, all the directories configured as the source 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: regarding `srcGenSourceDirs`, all the directories configured as sources 
```

will be distributed in the resulting jar artifact preserving the same folder structure as in the source.

The following example shows how to set up a dependency with another artifact or sbt module containing the IDL definitions (`foo-domain`):

```
//...
.settings(
  Seq(
      idlType := "avro",
      srcGenSerializationType := "AvroWithSchema",
      srcGenJarNames := Seq("foo-domain"),
      srcGenTargetDir := (Compile / sourceManaged).value / "compiled_avro",
      sourceGenerators in Compile += (Compile / srcGen).taskValue,
      libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
        "io.higherkindness" %% "mu-rpc-channel" % V.muRPC
      )
  )
)
//...
```

##Generating sources

> Let's supose a `proto` file like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's suppose a `proto` file like
```

  ```proto
    syntax = "proto3";
    
    package foo.bar;
    
    message HelloRequest {
      string arg1 = 1;
      string arg2 = 2;
      repeated string arg3 = 3;
    }
    
    message HelloResponse {
      string arg1 = 1;
      string arg2 = 2;
      repeated string arg3 = 3;
    }
    
    service ProtoGreeter {
      rpc SayHelloProto (HelloRequest) returns (HelloResponse);
      rpc LotsOfRepliesProto (HelloRequest) returns (stream HelloResponse);
      rpc LotsOfGreetingsProto (stream HelloRequest) returns (HelloResponse);
      rpc BidiHelloProto (stream HelloRequest) returns (stream HelloResponse);
      rpc BidiHelloFs2Proto (stream HelloRequest) returns (stream HelloResponse);
    }
  ```
 As you can see, we are defining two case classes, ``HelloRequest`` and `HelloResponse`, and a service, `ProtoGreeter`. 

>  Therefore, the generated scala definition is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Therefore, the generated scala definition would be
```

Reviewer: `Scala`

          }
        }
      ]
    },
    {
      "name" : "HelloResponse",
      "type" : "record",
      "fields" : [
        {
          "name" : "arg1",
          "type" : "string"
        },
        {
          "name" : "arg2",
          "type" : [
            "null",
            "string"
          ]
        },
        {
          "name" : "arg3",
          "type" : {
            "type" : "array",
            "items" : "string"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ],
  "messages" : {
    "sayHelloAvro" : {
      "request" : [
        {
          "name" : "arg",
          "type" : "HelloRequest"
        }
      ],
      "response" : "HelloResponse"
    },
    "sayNothingAvro" : {
      "request" : [
      ],
      "response" : "null"
    }
  }
}

```
or ``.avdl``:

```avroidl
@namespace("foo.bar")
protocol MyGreeterService{

    record HelloRequest {
        string arg1;
        union { null, string } arg2;
        array<string> arg3;
    }

    record HelloResponse {
        string arg1;
        union { null, string } arg2;
        array<string>  arg3;
    }

    foo.bar.HelloResponse sayHelloAvro(foo.bar.HelloRequest arg);

    void sayNothingAvro();
}
```

> So we get the same service:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll get the same service:
```
